content/privacy.md, before:

---
title: Privacy Policy
date: "2018-06-28T00:00:00+01:00"
draft: false
share: false
commentable: false
editable: false

# Optional header image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
header:
  caption: ""
  image: ""
---
### Disclaimer

I am not a website expert by any means. From my perspective, internet
technology is a giant spaghetti monster rivaling the worst code bases
imaginable. I find it a miracle it actually works. 

Thus, all things below should be interpreted as being to the best of my
knowledge.

### So why do I use cookies?

I use Google Analytics on this site so that I can keep count of how many people
view the site and how popular specific pages are.

To do this, Google uses cookies. Via Hugo settings (from which this website is
built), I've:

- Enabled anonymizing the IP addresses of users
- Enabled respect of HTTP Do Not Track headers

If you have any questions regarding cookies or what they are, see [this
website](https://www.cookiesandyou.com/) for more information.

Commit message:

feat(privacy): Add about tracking outside website

content/privacy.md, after:

---
title: Privacy Policy
date: "2018-06-28T00:00:00+01:00"
draft: false
share: false
commentable: false
editable: false

# Optional header image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
header:
  caption: ""
  image: ""
---
### Disclaimer

I am not a website expert by any means. From my perspective, internet
technology is a giant spaghetti monster rivaling the worst code bases
imaginable. I find it a miracle it actually works. 

Thus, all things below should be interpreted as being to the best of my
knowledge.

### So why do I use cookies?

I use Google Analytics on this site so that I can keep count of how many people
view the site and how popular specific pages are. Google Analytics does _not_
track your browsing history outside of this website.

To do this, Google uses cookies. Via Hugo settings (from which this website is
built), I've:

- Enabled anonymizing the IP addresses of users
- Enabled respect of HTTP Do Not Track headers

If you have any questions regarding cookies or what they are, see [this
website](https://www.cookiesandyou.com/) for more information.
